Title: Meeting with Mel
Date: 2014-02-20 03:20
Tags: life, career
Slug: meeting-with-mel
Category: personal

I met with Mel Chua today, 1-on-1, in order to get a better idea of how
I can make the most of my time at Hacker School. She mentioned intrinsic
motivation (motivation from within) versus extrinsic motivation
(motivation from the outside) in her what-kind-of-learner-are-you
workshop. Basically, you learn better if your motivation about a topic
comes intrinsically.   
  
However, I've been having a hard time figuring out what topics motivates
me intrinsically. I feel like I've been choosing topics, workshops, and
projects that would be good for my career as a software developer versus
me being like, "oh WOW! This topic is SOOOoo fascinating! Let's spend
HOURS coding it up."   
  
Talking with Mel, she and I have similar back stories. We both grew up
with strict Asian parents and were wired to do well in a structured
educational environment. We only had three real career options due to
family pressures (doctor, lawyer, engineer -- although Mel also had the
option of business school). We've both been good at listening to other
peoples' voices and mold ourselves to follow the rules of society,
whether it be academia or a big corporation.  
  
Now coming to Hacker School, I was completely lost on what to do. There
was no one to tell me the guidelines. I didn't have a project that I was
passionate about walking in. Talking with Mel, I realized I've forgotten
how to listen to my inner voice. I am very good at listening to everyone
else, pieces their words together, and regurgitating it back. That is
why when I come to a new problem or topic I have no clue about, I get so
nervous, since I have no one else's voice to piece together. If someone
challenges my answer, I am quick to change it rather than listening to
my gut. Even my opinions about movies or restaurants are influenced by
friends or Yelp.   
  
Mel recommended that I need to practice silence. Meditation is another
word for it, but basically I need to spend some time not cognitively
thinking and emptying my mind in order to hear my inner voice again. The
book “Women’s Ways of Knowing” has a section that describes the journey
through silence that one has to pass through to move from “parroting
others” to finding your authentic voice:  
  
“To most women, the first steps on this journey do not feel like
progress. The voice diminishes in volume; it lacks authority. These
women lack even the derived authority of those who, having faith in
received knowledge, can assume as they parrot their elders that they
speak the truth. Lacking, also, the inner authority of the subjectivist,
they cannot cheerfully blurt out the first idea that springs to mind.
The inner voice turns critical; it tells them their ideas may be stupid.
Women at this position think before they speak; and, because their ideas
must measure up to certain objective standards, they speak in measured
tones. Often, they do not speak at all. But this is not a passive
silence; on the other side of this silence, reason is stirring.” (page
93)  
  
It sounded weird and VERY uncomfortable. Based on her workshop, I found
that I was an active learner, where I need to continuously talk to
process information. In conversations, I need to fill the silence with
noise, so I usually end up rambling in order to fill the silence.   
  
She realized this was going to be hard, but asked me to try it for a
week. Here is the schedule she suggested for me:  
  
Morning:  Take up to 15 minutes to write 3 pages of whatever it is on
your mind. Basically do a brain dump to get all the clutter out. This
way, your brain is prepared for the silence. This is a practice called
“morning pages” and comes from the book “The Artist’s Way.”  
  
Mid-Afternoon: 20 minutes of silence. If that is too hard, start with 5
minutes and work your way up. Also, this doesn't mean 20 minutes of no
talking and thinking about programming problems or what to do tomorrow.
Just empty your mind and make peace with the silence.  
  
Evening: Examen. In order to become more sensitive to my own voice, I
have to practice listening to my “interior movements,” which are sort of
like emotions/feelings. These steps are adapted from spiritual exercises
composed by Ignatius of Loyola:  
  
1. Feelings review! Take 10 minutes to reflect on any feelings you had
today and review them. Example: I was scared when this person asked to
pair programming with me!   
  
2. Analysis! Try to think why these feelings came up or what situation
caused this feeling. See if you had this feeling before in the past and
if there are any patterns. Example: I am not comfortable pair
programming in a language I don't know. This happened back in college
when I was paired up with a partner who wanted to use an unfamiliar
language!  
  
3. Next Steps: Identify future steps for tomorrow about how you can
discover your inner voice! If you have a feeling that you are not sure
how identify, try to recreate it in order to learn how to make that
feeling happen. If you want to overcome a fear, try to get
uncomfortable. Remember feelings that truly get you excited or happy,
and recreate those moments. If you have feelings you hate or piss you
off, log those too and see if you can find any patterns!  
  
I am keeping an open mind and giving this a try! I hope I can find my
inner voice by practicing this everyday and find what I am truly
passionate about!  
  
  

